>> What is the
holographic principle,
and how did it emerge?
In this episode, we look at how
to access the infinite field
of information in our universe.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The holographic principle
has been present throughout
the ages, although it may have
not been called that way early
on.
The concept that everything
is present in everything,
that from any point or
any part of the universe,
you could get the
information of the whole,
has been present in ancient
civilization traditions,
shamanism, and masters
around the world
in many different cultures.
The concept of oneness
has been there all along.
However, in the development
of the holographic principle
in standard physics, we
start the exploration
with a famous
physicist, David Bohm,
which thought of the implicate
and explicate order of creation
as this structure
in which creation
contained every piece of
information of the whole
in every point.
Every region contains the total
structure unfolded within it.
He thought that all of the
information of the universe
would be present in every point.
And this was described
is his exploration
of the holographic
principle early on.
Now, what is a hologram?
OK.
A hologram is an
experiment or a setup
in order to get a
three-dimensional projection
in space.
It's important to understand
the holographic principle
of physics is called that
way only as an analogy.
And this is where people get
mixed up, including physicists.
And so I'm going to make
a very distinct separation
between a hologram that
we may call on Earth here
and the universe having
a holographic principle.
Those are two different things.
However, the hologram
is a good analogy
to most likely what
the universe is doing.
>> To produce a hologram, a
laser beam is split into two
identical beams and redirected
by the use of mirrors.
One of the split beams is
directed at the object--
in this example, an apple.
Some of the light is reflected
off the object directly
onto the photographic plate.
The second beam is directed
And when the two beams intersect
and interfere with each other,
the interference pattern
recreates a virtual 3D image
of the apple in this space.
Interestingly, the
word "hologram"
comes from the
Greek word "holos"--
whole, or "grama"-- message.
If a hologram is
cut into pieces,
each piece contains
whole views of
the entire holographic image.
>> And what's really amazing and
interesting about this is that
if you cut the plate in half
and shoot the laser at it,
the apple is still
going to appear.
It's going to have
lower resolution,
but it's still going to appear.
And if you cut it in quarter
and you should the laser at it,
it's still going
to have the apple.
All the information
is still there.
You can cut, theoretically,
the plate to infinity
and still have the
information of the apple.
So the concept is that every
point contains the whole, which
is a concept, as I
said, that was already
present in ancient civilization
all around the world,
in shamanic cultures and so on.
Physics develop in such
a way that we discovered
that there is this possibility
in the universe that
black holes could form.
And this was very
puzzling for physicists.
Einstein's filled
equations predicted
that black holes could form.
Einstein himself didn't
believe it could exist.
He thought that part of
the equation is wrong.
All the rest is working
out, but most likely,
a black hole cannot form.
At the time, the word "black
hole" wasn't even coined.
It was called a singularity.
And it is the foundation of the
solution to Einstein's field
equation.
>> It's called the Schwarzschild
solution to the Einstein field
equation.
The Schwarzschild solution
is the primary solution
to Einstein field equation
used to describe and calculate
gravity or orbitals
of planets and stars.
>> And so it's very much
present, but it mostly ignored,
the part in which the mass of
an object could have a density
so high that the light could
not even escape from it.
However, when black
holes were discovered--
but even before,
when exploration
about that part of Einstein
field equation was done--
there was something puzzling.
If light is falling
into a black hole,
if information is falling
into a black hole--
so you can think of information
and information theory
as particles falling into the
black hole like photons that
could carry information about
their velocity, their position,
and so on.
So you can think of
particles as information
in information theory.
There's a direct and analog
between information and energy.
Then where is the
information going?
When it goes into the black
hole, where does it end up?
If the black hole
can evaporate--
and this is something that
was the result of some
of the exploration that Stephen
Hawking did on black holes.
>> It's called
Hawking radiation.
Hawking predicted that energy
fluctuations from the vacuum
cause the generation of
particle-anti-particle pairs
of virtual particles
near the event
horizon of the black hole.
One of the particles
falls into the black hole
while the other escapes before
they have the opportunity
to annihilate each other.
The net result is that to
someone viewing the black hole,
it would appear that a
particle had been emitted.
Since the particle that is
emitted has positive energy,
the particle that gets
absorbed by the black hole
has negative energy relative
to the outside universe.
This results in the black hole
losing energy and thus mass.
Smaller primordial
black holes can actually
emit more energy
than they absorb,
which results in
them losing net mass.
Larger black holes, such as
those that are one solar mass,
absorb more cosmic
radiation than they
emit through Hawking radiation.
>> Well, if it's losing energy
and information is falling
in, where is the
information going to end up?
Where is it going?
And in the standard
model of cosmology,
which was Hawking's
opinion and others,
is that the information is lost.
But that violates some of the
foundations of physics in which
information cannot be
lost in quantum theory.
And this was a big problem.
There was what is commonly
described as the black hole
information war that developed
between quantum physicists
and cosmologists,
some saying, no,
the information is just lost,
some saying all the information
end up in a parallel
universe somewhere else,
and quantum physicists saying,
no, information cannot be lost.
The two main characters
of this black hole war
was Stephen Hawking
and Leonard Susskind,
which is the director of the
Physics Department at Stanford
University.
And the two were debating what
happens to the information
in the universe.
Eventually, with the
help of other physicists,
Leonard Susskind,
from little bit
of a convoluted path
of earlier physics that
were written by
Bekenstein and others,
develop a concept
that is now known
as the holographic principle.
This concept showed that
the information that's
falling into the black
hole is holographically
imprinted on the surface of
the black hole as Planck vacuum
fluctuation.
And here is our ether again at
this nice, centrally position,
again reemerging, showing
that the information
is held in the
structure of the vacuum
at the surface of
the black hole.
So it is not lost.
The mathematics
were written for it,
and it give the
correct temperature
for the entropy
of the black hole,
for the temperature
of the black hole.
And so it was proven
to be correct,
or at least it has been
theorized to be correct.
And eventually, Stephen
Hawking conceded the bet
that information
could be retained
on the surface of
the black hole,
and the information
was not lost.
So Leonard Susskind and
the holographic principle
became explored more and more
by many, many physicists,
and the concept became
very much embedded
in the modern interpretation
of black hole entropy
and some of the most
advanced and most important
mathematics and physics that
are being explored today,
including er equals epr,
showing that entanglement
may be through black holes
and that black holes are
like little--
entangled by particles,
saying that particles
may be as well black holes.
But before we jump
into all this,
the holographic
principle is something
that I had developed
in a different way
from the early physics
that I had come up with.
I had realized that this
Planck field, this ether
is made out of teeny
oscillators at the Planck scale.
So you can think of
them as discreteness,
granular structure of
spacetime, that Einstein
was correct to think
that spacetime curved
to produce gravity,
but spacetime
is only smooth at large scale.
When you look closely, just
like water in our tub--
when you look at the water
going down the drain,
it appears smooth, but
when you look closely,
it's made out of atoms,
which is granular.
Spacetime was made of
these granular structures.
And I had come up with a little
bit the same interpretation
of the holographic principle
from a different perspective.
But in my case, I had realized
that the granular structure
of spacetime is
not a 2D surface as
in the current
holographic principle,
but that the grains are little
spheres, little particles.
And it wasn't just on the
surface of the black hole,
but it was on the interior
of the black hole.
Spacetime and the
vacuum structure
is not excluded from the
inside of the black hole.
So I started to think about
this holographic principle
and the granular
structure of spacetime,
the granular structure
of the vacuum fluctuation
being this dynamic spin
that produce particles--
most importantly, the center
of the atom, the proton.
Think of the proton in
the nucleus of the atom
as being the center of
the vortex of spacetime
coming in and making a
little proton in the middle.
So imagine all the information
that's spinning together
that makes up a proton.
I calculated that.
I calculated how
many Plancks are
on the inside of the
radius of a proton.
And I was amazed when I
finished the calculation
because the mass of
all the little Plancks
inside the proton
added up to the mass
of the universe precisely.
So right away, it
seemed holographic,
which in principle
means that all
the information of the whole
is present in each point.
And I was finding that.
All the information,
all the energy
seemed to be present in
the Planck information
inside the proton.
Don't think of the
universe being in there.
Just think of the information
of the universe being
in there, just like when you
play a CD of a music orchestra,
the violin is not on the CD.
The piano is not on the CD.
The orchestra director or
conductor is not on the CD.
But all of these things and the
information are there, right?
So think of the information
being present holographically
in the Planck field.
So you can imagine how small the
Planck granular structure must
be to contain all the
information of all
of the other protons in
the universe in one proton.
But that's what the
equation was giving.
But then I thought,
wait a minute.
That information is inside
the mini black hole, right?
It's not able to come out.
It's restricted
by the information
that's on the surface, the
entropy of the black hole.
So then I looked
at the relationship
between the surface
and the inside.
How much of the
information inside could
go through the surface?
I got a number which is
the ratio between the two.
I multiplied that
number by the mass
of 1 bit of
information, 1 Plank,
to get the mass of the ratio.
I got the exact
mass of the proton.
And when I manipulated
the equation,
I got a radius for the
proton, and that radius
was 4% smaller than
what is predicted
by the standard model.
And when I published
this, then I predicted--
and this was in
December of 2012--
I predicted that when we
would measure the proton
more precisely, we might
find that smaller radius.
There was a result of
these experiments that
showed that the radius of the
proton from muonic scattering
was smaller than predicted
by the standard model.
And my prediction was
precisely that new radius
that was measured.
So that radius was
confirmed, and my prediction
was inside one standard
deviation of the experiment.
So I was inside the margin
of error of experiment.
So my radius may have
been even much more
precise than the experiment.
>> This means fundamentally
that the information network
of the universe--
the spinning of this
Plank field into existence
in the universe--
connects everything together
since all the information
is present in one point
in the center of an atom.
>> So if that was true, then
I should be able to take that
equation and extrapolate it
to the rest of the universe.
That took me a while, of course.
It's not simple.
I'm describing this
in simple terms.
It gets complicated.
Basically, you can
take this equation
and apply it to the electron.
That I have published.
And it does the right
radius and the right mass
for the electron, and so on.
It can be applied to
the whole universe,
and it gives the right
mass for the universe
without the need of dark
matter and dark energy.
It gives the right
acceleration for the universe.
And as we discovered
just recently,
it gives the right
temperature, and so on.
And when we write the equation
in a more classical way using
thermodynamics, you actually
can get from this equation
all of the scales
in our universe,
including superclusters,
clusters, galaxies, stars,
planets.
So we get everything
in the universe
emerging from this
holographic view of creation.
Now, I want to make sure I
make this distinction again.
It's not a holographic plate
somewhere in the universe
projecting a
holographic creation.
It is all of the interference
pattern of spacetime
of the Planck field creating
the interference weaving
of the information
in the universe
producing this
holographic effect.
Pushing the holographic
analogy to a 2D surface
projecting our
universe is wrong.
And it's been done by
physicists and scientists
out there misleading and
overreaching the analogy.
That is not the case.
The fact that the
universe is holographic
is because of the
natural behavior
of the nature of the oscillation
structure of the field that
makes up our universe.
Every scale has the development
of a little black hole
or a large black hole,
like the center of a galaxy
or the center of an atom.
And it's basically black
holes all the way up and all
the way down.
One of the evidence
for this is that when
we solve these equations
for our universe,
it clearly demonstrated
that the universe is
a membrane that obeys the exact
condition to be a black hole.
So it really is not debatable.
It gives the correct mass.
But not only that.
It gives the correct
temperature for the black hole.
That is, the equation gives
us the correct radiation
for that black hole, which
would give the temperature.
And the temperature it
gives is the temperature
we measure in the background
temperature of our universe.
And so it definitely
demonstrates
that we live inside a black
hole and that everything
inside that black hole are
smaller black holes that
organize in certain ways to
make clusters, superclusters,
galaxies, eventually
stars and planets
and biology and all this stuff.
And the dynamics of this black
hole structure across scale
divides in very specific
harmonic relationship.
Think of the universe
being one wavelength,
very long wavelength, and
then shorter wavelengths
and shorter wavelengths
all the way down to
the Planck, and then
eventually, as we discovered
with this equation, sub-Planck.
And the sub-Planck
wavelength that we discovered
is the same distance
from the Planck
as the Planck is from the
wavelength of the universe.
So the Planck radius, to Planck
size, the Planck little ball,
is in between the size of the
universe and the sub-Planck.
So these are huge scales.
They're immense.
>> For example, if we
take a little Planck,
one bit of information
at the Planck scale,
and we grow it in scale to
the size of a grain of sand,
then the nucleus of
an atom, the proton,
which is extremely
small already,
would have a diameter the
approximate equivalent between
the sun and Alpha Centauri.
That diameter is about
40 trillion kilometers
or 4.2 light years
from Earth, a distance
that would take about
6,300 years to travel
using current technology.
>> So this is the change in
scale between the Planck field
and the atom.
So you can imagine that it
was easy for standard physics,
for the physics community
to have missed it, right?
It's so teeny.
It's so far removed from the
scale at which we experience
reality that it's
nothing that we
knew was there until recently.
Now we're starting
to discover, oh, wow,
these little Planck
oscillators really
have an impact on
black hole physics.
We're discovering, yes, the
temperature and the entropy
of a black hole
is related to what
these little Plancks are doing.
In my equation,
we're discovering
that actually, all of the
mass, the forces, everything
we see in the universe is
actually the result of what
these little Planck are doing.
But then you can ask, well, what
are these little Planck made
of?
Well, they're probably
made of smaller Plancks.
And this is what we
calculated with the equation
because the equation
gives us the scales.
So we could calculate
down as well.
And we found that the next
scale of the sub-Planck
would be the same distance from
the sub-Planck to the Planck
as of from the Planck to the
size of the universe, which
would lead you to
say, well, maybe
our universe is like a
Planck for a larger universe,
and that universe is like a
Planck for an even larger one.
And now you're starting to get
the sense that the equation is
telling us about things that are
much further, much outside what
we can directly observe.
But since it is accurate
for everything we observe,
we know that it's most likely
accurate for these things that
we cannot observe as well.
And that would mean that we
live in a larger universe,
and that universe is
in a larger universe.
And thus, we should be
talking about multiverse.
And the multiverses are
not parallel to each other,
but they're embedded within
each other like Russian dolls.
Now, at any scale
that you look at,
you'll find a
parallel relationship.
You look at galaxies.
You'll see a galaxy
here and a galaxy there
because they're approximately
all the same scales, right?
But then you see nothing,
and then eventually, you
see stars, right?
And then stars are approximately
all the same scales.
They're all in a band of scales.
And in that scale, I could
say things are parallel.
So it would be the
same as I would say,
well, here's our universe.
And in that scale of
universes, there's
other universes
that are parallel.
Think of bubbles of
universes that are parallel.
But that scale would
be embedded in a larger
scale that's a larger universe,
like Russian doll universe.
So this gives us a
much different view
of the structure of our world,
the structure of our universe,
and the holographic and as well
fractal nature of creation.
What's important
to remember here
is that creation
appears to be the result
of a flow of information in
which each point contains
the whole.
As the Planck fields
spiral into creation,
the information,
because there is
smaller and smaller and
smaller bits of information
in each point, is conserved.
And all of knowledge
about the whole
can be extrapolated
from the part.
For instance, in
these equations,
we discover we literally
were studying the proton.
We were studying the
proton using this equation,
and we ended up
extrapolating the mass
of the universe, its
temperature, its acceleration,
and so on.
So from the point
of a proton, we
learned about the
whole universe.
And so imagine what
that means to you.
That means that from
any proton in your body,
if you were able to
connect and have access,
you could know about everything
else in the universe.
You can know about the
place you've never been,
remote view that place.
You could influence something
that is far away from you.
There's all kinds of
implication to these equations
that actually meet some of the
most esoteric concept and some
of the esoteric
experience people
have been having in the world
where they think of somebody,
and they call, or they go to
a place, and then they say,
oh, I dreamed about that place.
I know that place.
I've been there.
Although they've never
been there physically.
If all the information is
present in every point,
that means that you can
have access to information
that's non-local to you.
And that means as well that
you can learn from within you.
That is, not all knowledge comes
from outside of you into you,
but that actually, you have
knowledge within you that
can emerge from you.
And that is the
creative process.
And that leads as well to
understanding the source
of awareness or consciousness.